A spatial database is a database that is optimized for storing and querying data that represents objects defined in a geometric space. Most spatial databases allow the representation of simple geometric objects such as points, lines and polygons. Some spatial databases handle more complex structures such as 3D objects, topological coverages, linear networks, and TINs. While typical databases have developed to manage various numeric and character types of data, such databases require additional functionality to process spatial data types efficiently, and developers have often added geometry or feature data types. The Open Geospatial Consortium (OGC) developed the Simple Features specification (first released in 1997)[1] and sets standards for adding spatial functionality to database systems.[2] The SQL/MM Spatial ISO/IEC standard is a part the SQL/MM multimedia standard and extends the Simple Features standard with data types that support circular interpolations.[3]


Contents
1	Geodatabase
2	Characteristics
3	Spatial index
4	Spatial query
5	Spatial database management systems
5.1	List
5.2	Table of free systems especially for spatial data processing
6	See also
7	References
8	Further reading
9	External links
Geodatabase
Main category: Geographical databases
Further information: Map database management
A geodatabase (also geographical database and geospatial database) is a database of geographic data, such as countries, administrative divisions, cities, and related information. Such databases can be useful for websites that wish to identify the locations of their visitors for customization purposes.

Characteristics
Database systems use indexes to quickly look up values; however, this way of indexing data is not optimal for spatial queries. Instead, spatial databases use a spatial index to speed up database operations.

In addition to typical SQL queries such as SELECT statements, spatial databases can perform a wide variety of spatial operations. The following operations and many more are specified by the Open Geospatial Consortium standard:

Spatial Measurements: Computes line length, polygon area, the distance between geometries, etc.
Spatial Functions: Modify existing features to create new ones, for example by providing a buffer around them, intersecting features, etc.
Spatial Predicates: Allows true/false queries about spatial relationships between geometries. Examples include "do two polygons overlap" or 'is there a residence located within a mile of the area we are planning to build the landfill?' (see DE-9IM)
Geometry Constructors: Creates new geometries, usually by specifying the vertices (points or nodes) which define the shape.
Observer Functions: Queries which return specific information about a feature such as the location of the center of a circle
Some databases support only simplified or modified sets of these operations, especially in cases of NoSQL systems like MongoDB and CouchDB.

Spatial index
Spatial indices are used by spatial databases (databases which store information related to objects in space) to optimize spatial queries. Conventional index types do not efficiently handle spatial queries such as how far two points differ, or whether points fall within a spatial area of interest. Common spatial index methods include:

Geohash
HHCode
Grid (spatial index)
Z-order (curve)
Quadtree
Octree
UB-tree
R-tree: Typically the preferred method for indexing spatial data.[citation needed] Objects (shapes, lines and points) are grouped using the minimum bounding rectangle (MBR). Objects are added to an MBR within the index that will lead to the smallest increase in its size.
R+ tree
R* tree
Hilbert R-tree
X-tree
kd-tree
m-tree – an m-tree index can be used for the efficient resolution of similarity queries on complex objects as compared using an arbitrary metric.
Binary space partitioning (BSP-Tree): Subdividing space by hyperplanes.
Spatial query
A spatial query is a special type of database query supported by spatial databases, including geodatabases. The queries differ from non-spatial SQL queries in several important ways. Two of the most important are that they allow for the use of geometry data types such as points, lines and polygons and that these queries consider the spatial relationship between these geometries.

The function names for queries differ across geodatabases. The following list contains commonly used functions built into PostGIS, a free geodatabase which is a PostgreSQL extension (the term 'geometry' refers to a point, line, box or other two or three dimensional shape):

Function prototype: functionName (parameter(s)) : return type

Distance(geometry, geometry) : number
Equals(geometry, geometry) : boolean
Disjoint(geometry, geometry) : boolean
Intersects(geometry, geometry) : boolean
Touches(geometry, geometry) : boolean
Crosses(geometry, geometry) : boolean
Overlaps(geometry, geometry) : boolean
Contains(geometry, geometry) : boolean
Length(geometry) : number
Area(geometry) : number
Centroid(geometry) : geometry
Spatial database management systems
Main category: Spatial database management systems
List
AllegroGraph – a graph database which provides a mechanism for efficient storage and retrieval of two-dimensional geospatial coordinates for Resource Description Framework data.[citation needed] It includes an extension syntax for SPARQL queries.
Caliper extends the Raima Data Manager with spatial datatypes, functions, and utilities.
CouchDB a document-based database system that can be spatially enabled by a plugin called Geocouch
Elasticsearch is a document-based database system that supports two types of geo data: geo_point fields which support lat/lon pairs, and geo_shape fields, which support points, lines, circles, polygons, multi-polygons, etc.[4]
GeoMesa is a cloud-based spatio-temporal database built on top of Apache Accumulo and Apache Hadoop (also supports Apache HBase, Google Bigtable, Apache Cassandra, and Apache Kafka). GeoMesa supports full OGC Simple Features and a GeoServer plugin.
H2 supports geometry types[5] and spatial indices[6] as of version 1.3.173 (2013-07-28). An extension called H2GIS available on Maven Central gives full OGC Simple Features support.
Any edition of IBM DB2 can be spatially-enabled to implement the OpenGIS spatial functionality with SQL spatial types and functions.
IBM Informix Geodetic and Spatial datablade extensions auto-install on use and expand Informix's datatypes to include multiple standard coordinate systems and support for RTree indexes. Geodetic and Spatial data can also be incorporated with Informix's Timeseries data support for tracking objects in motion over time.
Linter SQL Server supports spatial types and spatial functions according to the OpenGIS specifications.
Microsoft SQL Server has support for spatial types since version 2008
MonetDB/GIS extension for MonetDB adds OGS Simple Features to the relational column-store database.[7]
MySQL DBMS implements the datatype geometry, plus some spatial functions implemented according to the OpenGIS specifications.[8] However, in MySQL version 5.5 and earlier, functions that test spatial relationships are limited to working with minimum bounding rectangles rather than the actual geometries. MySQL versions earlier than 5.0.16 only supported spatial data in MyISAM tables. As of MySQL 5.0.16, InnoDB, NDB, BDB, and ARCHIVE also support spatial features.
Neo4j – a graph database that can build 1D and 2D indexes as B-tree, Quadtree and Hilbert curve directly in the graph
OpenLink Virtuoso has supported SQL/MM since version 6.01.3126[9], with significant enhancements including GeoSPARQL in Open Source Edition 7.2.6, and in Enterprise Edition 8.2.0[10]
Oracle Spatial
PostgreSQL DBMS (database management system) uses the spatial extension PostGIS to implement the standardized datatype geometry and corresponding functions.
Redis with the Geo API.[11]
RethinkDB supports geospatial indexes in 2D.
SAP HANA supports geospatial with SPS08.[12]
Smallworld VMDS, the native GE Smallworld GIS database
Spatial Query Server from Boeing spatially enables Sybase ASE.
SpatiaLite extends Sqlite with spatial datatypes, functions, and utilities.
Tarantool supports geospatial queries with RTREE index.[13]
Teradata Geospatial includes 2D spatial functionality (OGC-compliant) in its data warehouse system.
Vertica Place, the geo-spatial extension for HP Vertica, adds OGC-compliant spatial features to the relational column-store database.[14]